[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's the most fundamental
act of human life.
And though we may have come
a long way from our early
ancestors, one thing hasn't
changed much.
Sex.
Yet despite being widely
practiced, sex has always been
a bit of a mystery.
But science is starting to
unlock its secrets, literally
getting under our skin to reveal
a new, bizarre world.
A world where the truly
unexpected can happen.
For the first time on
television, we follow a woman
under the influence of hormones,
acquiring the body,
the mind, and facial
hair of a man.
Understanding sex is the
key to understanding
how to build a human.
All humans are built in bits far
too small to be seen with
the naked eye.
We're made up of cells.
And inside every cell is exactly
the same mix of genes.
Our DNA.
Until recently, reproduction
was regarded as pretty
straightforward.
To build a new human, you first
take the genes that make
up a woman, then the genes that
make up a man, and then
enthusiastically mix them up.
But things aren't quite
that simple.
We might have been doing it
since the dawn of time, but
scientists know very little
about the basic processes.
Reproductive physiologist Dr.
Roy Levin has struggled with
the technical limitations of
studying sex for decades.
We didn't really have the
apparatus to allow us to do
the measurements.
And there was a long period of
time when you only could guess
what was happening from the
external appearances of the
men and women in coitus.
So that you couldn't really
tell what was happening
inside, because you
just can't see.
Our understanding of sex hasn't
moved on much since
Leonardo da Vinci first started
dissecting corpses and
studying them over
500 years ago.
The Queen holds this drawing
by Leonardo in her very own
private collection.
Dr. Levin's life long quest to
reveal the secrets of sex is
taking him to Germany.
What I've come for
is a machine.
This is a machine that makes
the body transparent.
You can look inside and see
movements and the secrets,
really, of coitus and how people
get sexually aroused.
There are very few machines like
this in the world, and
one of them is here in the town
called Krefeld, quite a
few miles outside
of Dusseldorf.
And the machine Dr. Levin's
come to see
is this fMRI scanner.
It's basically a camera which
uses magnetic fields to
penetrate human flesh.
Today, in the interest of
science, Michael DeGroot and
his girlfriend Liz Leahy are
going to attempt to have sex
in its cramped confines.
Well, this is the machine.
As you can see inside, it's
got, like, two donuts.
Those are the very
large magnets.
And in between is the space
that you'll lie
down and have coitus.
It's been specially adapted,
that means just a single board
has been put down.
And you'll lay in between
the two magnets.
And hopefully that will capture
the images of what's
going on during sexual
intercourse.
The other thing that has to
happen is, Liz, is that you
have to wear this girdle.
It won't do much for your
figure, but it will hopefully
capture the images from what's
happening inside your body.
So you have to put around you,
in the pelvic area, and then
you lay on top of that.
And so that's really basically
all there is to it.
The other thing is, though,
Michael, that will help you to
perform with this pharmaceutical
support for it.
So hopefully it will help
you to do this.
Let's go and get changed, OK?
Dr. Levin is well aware of the
problems that need to be
overcome if this experiment
is to be successful.
It's not the easiest thing in
the world to maintain an
erection and have intercourse
in terms of this
particular set up.
They're brave people that
go into these machines.
We've seen the machine and I'm
interested to see how we're
going to maneuver ourselves in
there, because it looks like a
pretty constricted space.
And I know they want us in
one certain position.
I hope that we're able to
situate ourselves so that they
get the images that they want.
That's my main concern.
Michael has a personal interest
in taking part in
this study.
I have a small background in
human sexuality in the
psychology aspect, because I'm
a psychology undergraduate.
With my background, I just got
an interest in hearing about
these images that would be one
of the first times that these
would ever be recorded.
I just thought it would
be really fun to be a
part of this work.
OK.
We're ready to go, you
can start now.
The scanner takes a picture
every three seconds, and
produces images of the body
from top to bottom.
This is the first time that such
images have been seen on
British television.
You can see the penis here.
That's outside of the body from
about here and this is
the root of the penis
inside the body.
And this is inside the
female's body.
That's her pubic symphysis, the
bone, and here would be
the pubic hair, just
around here.
And that's, of course,
a bottom.
And this is the vagina
that the penis is in.
The top here is the gland.
And the thing that's obvious in
this cross section is the
unusual shape of the penis
during intercourse.
It's like a boomerang.
That's what we found out by
these machines, actually.
That, in fact, the penis does
look like a boomerang.
It isn't straight like they drew
it in the early times.
In fact, it is bent, as you
can see, quite clearly.
It's actually incredible
because, as far as when you
have an erection, you think it's
hard and solid as a rock
or wood or something.
But when you look at those
pictures, it's unbelievable.
You have the 90 degree angle,
you can't even imagine that it
would bend that way.
It's really fascinating
to see--
It's just incredible.
-- what the body does.
It's not something you really
think about when you're
actually in an act like that.
And to actually have the
pictures to see what's going
on, it's just extremely
interesting.
Nobody knows why the penis
has to go through such
extraordinary contortions.
One theory is that it's a relic
from our past, when sex
was more commonly done on all
fours, and not face to face.
Dr. Levin is aware these
experiments might be seen as
prurient or trivial.
But he believes that
understanding the mechanics
has important practical
applications.
One possibility is that when
we get a bank of normal
images, of functional, normal
reproduction, and the
movements that occur, and we
have a whole range of images--
because this is just one couple
that we've done--
we can then possibly look at
people who are abnormal, that
they can't have children.
And maybe the dysfunctions that
are there might be in the
movements, might be in the
motility that we can pick up
and then we'll be able to look
at it, and possibly have
treatments for it.
But that's really looking
into the future.
We're just starting out.
Really, the first
step this is.
Understanding anatomy is
important if you really want
to understand what makes
men and women tick.
But there's also much that
can be learned by
studying their cells.
Down at this level, men and
women are all very similar.
Each cell holds a nucleus,
which, in turn, contains DNA,
the substance that builds us.
Each cell contains over two
meters of DNA, divided and
packaged neatly into
chromosomes.
There are 46 of these.
The real difference between men
and women is that women
normally have two x
sex chromosomes.
While men have an x and a y.
But it's not always that
straightforward.
Look at Jan Johnson, she's
an athletic, feminine,
42-year-old woman.
She's also a six foot three
inches tall, a distinct
advantage when you are
playing volleyball.
The other thing that's different
about Jen is that
she's genetically male.
There's a huge stigma attached
to my condition.
I think a lot of people don't
want to talk about their
personal conditions, and, you
know, no one's perfect.
Lots of people have problems.
And it's just a matter of
facing your deepest darkest
secrets in and bringing them
out in the open.
She had no idea that there was
anything strange about her
when she was growing up.
The only thing that I remember
is that I was just very active
and I just had a
lot of energy.
In terms of feeling different,
no, I didn't.
I just felt like a normal
little girl.
I had girlfriends and I had all
my dolls and everything
was just normal.
It wasn't until she went to
college to study anatomy that
she realized something
was wrong.
Quite simply, at the age of
nineteen, she still hadn't
gone through puberty.
I felt self-conscious, because
I wasn't developing like all
my girlfriends were
developing.
It's painful to stand up and be
different, and I wanted to
find out why I wasn't
starting my period.
So I ended up going to
the gynecologist
for the first time.
I came into class one
day very upset and--
because I had gone to the doctor
a few days before.
And they had very simply just
written x, y on a piece of
paper and gave that to me.
And that was supposed to be the
explanation of why I was
the way I was.
So why did Jan become a
woman, when her genes
were those of a man?
The answer lies in understanding
how the male sex
chromosome, the y chromosome,
works.
The most obvious thing
about the y is that
it isn't very big.
The y has around 60 genes,
and the x around 3,000.
The y chromosome is the
smallest chromosome.
And when you look at it in
detail, only a very small part
of it actually codes
for anything.
So most of it's a dessert.
Peter Goodfellow knows the
y chromosome intimately.
He found the gene responsible
for turning embryos into men.
It's on the y chromosome,
and it's called the SRY.
It's hugely influential
in how men develop.
And this is it.
But being very important
doesn't mean it's big.
Imagine that your DNA was
a piece of string, so
you could see it.
So we've magnified the DNA,
which is present in every cell
in your body, so it's visible.
And that piece of string
now would stretch
from here to Moscow.
Now if we were to start a
journey from here to Moscow on
foot, the y chromosome would
represent the first 20 miles
of that journey.
And the SRY gene would
be the first step on
the journey to Moscow.
It takes 30,000 genes
to build a human.
But just one gene, the
SRY, to build a man.
The SRY is a switch, which
clicks on when the fetus is
around six weeks old.
Until then, the baby could
become either male or female.
When the SRY is switched on, it
fires up the development of
the male sex organs.
There's a tiny genetic
difference.
That genetic difference leads
to one key difference, and
that one key difference
is men have testes
and women have ovaries.
And it's what produced by the
testes, and what's produced by
the ovaries, which is
responsible for the
differences you see between
males and females.
But Jan Johnson has a copy
of the SRY gene, so
why isn't she a man?
Well, the SRY triggers
development of the testes.
And they produce a versatility
hormone called testosterone.
Testosterone is a steroid
hormone and, one of the things
that steroid hormones are
excellent at is going in lots
of different places in the body
and instigating lots of
different changes.
And testosterone is a beautiful
example of that.
Testosterone rampages through
the male embryo, building
muscle and developing the
cardiovascular system.
It's this hormone which
makes men so very
different from women.
To a remarkable extent,
testosterone is responsible
for the masculinization
of the human body.
It's really--
in some ways, it's kind of
surprising that this one agent
seems to start this cascade
that has so
many different affects.
And it's testosterone this is
the answer to the riddle of
Jan Johnson's unusual
genetic makeup.
Jan has a condition called
AIS, androgen
insensitivity syndrome.
Her genes make testosterone,
but her body
can't respond to it.
If it can't react to
testosterone, the fetus
assumes the default position,
which is female.
And that's exactly what happened
to Jan Johnson.
The discovery that she's
genetically male was so
traumatizing that she couldn't
even tell her then boyfriend
and, future husband, Peter.
I told him, well, I'm unable
to have children, and, you
know, here's my situation,
I don't have my period.
But I never really got
into the nuts and
bolts of it with him.
Because it was embarrassing
for me.
I didn't want to
talk about it.
And I didn't think anyone
wanted to hear about it.
The only person she felt would
listen and understand was her
anatomy professor,
Kris Blodget.
I said, that's well, the first
thing I want to know is,
you're a normal girl.
You're not a boy, you're
definitely a girl, you're a
very feminine girl.
This should not change
your life.
It was devastating to know that
I had x y chromosomes,
and those are the same
chromosomes a man would have.
Then I said, well, you can't
respond to testosterone so
actually you are more feminine
than an actual, x, x female
who can respond to
testosterone too.
So I said, the people that
have this, develop this,
normal females, usually above
average in attractiveness.
They're tall, they're
very feminine.
Professor Blodget then got Jan
to check her our own genes, so
she could see there was nothing
to be frightened of.
She was probably the strongest
female person in
my life back then.
My mom couldn't really
offer any support.
And, you know, my siblings
certainly
couldn't offer support.
So I really didn't have anyone
who could explain it to me the
way she explained it to me.
And the pain and the hurt to
the discovery that she was
genetically male came flooding
back when they met for the
first time since Jan left
college, 25 years ago.
I was hoping that she'd put it
behind her, and was leading a
normal life, and
not considering
it a deep dark secret.
And realize that she is totally
feminine and normal.
She really made me feel a lot
better about myself, so it was
great to see her again.
Jan's unusual genetic makeup
means she can't have children,
the things she wants most. She
doesn't have a womb, or
ovaries, and that's
put an inevitable
strain on her marriage.
We've been together for 23
years, we've been married for
13 years and we certainly
had our ups and downs.
And some of the deepest lows
were over, you know, adoption.
And that's unfortunate.
I hoped back then that I would
meet someone that would want
to adopt children.
And it just didn't work out.
It was not the right time.
And we didn't have
the money, or--
for some reason or another
it just never worked out.
Ironically, Jan Johnson works
for a company which makes high
tech medical equipment.
But there's no technological
solution to her
inability to conceive.
She just doesn't have
the right genes.
Instead of a y, she'd
need another x.
That's because the second
x sends out
instructions to make ovaries.
These produced the female
hormone, estrogen, which
builds a womb and
fallopian tubes.
The discovery that men are
created from a female
blueprint was certainly a big
surprise, and contradicts
previously held notions
about the relative
importance of men and women.
Societies have decided the
relative importance of men and
women for thousands of years.
By and large, the men are
regarded as more important
than the women.
So when biology started to catch
up, at first they looked
to reinforce that.
The idea was that the sperm
contend the little person and
the woman was just the soil in
which the man would grow, they
baby would grow.
Gradually, as we've learned more
about it, we've realized
that the mum is rather more
important, that the woman's
rather more important.
And the big shock came when it
was realized that if you don't
have a sex chromosome, or one
of the sex chromosomes, you
don't come out as a boy.
You come out as a girl.
So what that tells us is that
the Bible was fundamentally
the wrong way around.
Woman was not born of
man's rib, it's
the other way around.
Adam, if anything, came
from Eve's rib.
So the male is an adapted
form of the female.
One very obvious remnant of our
female past can be found
on every male chest. Nipples.
The reason men have nipples is
because they developed in the
fetus before testosterone
kicked in.
But if a hit of testosterone
is all it takes to turn the
female form into the male, what
would happen if a genetic
female were to be
exposed to it?
Max Toth, a software programmer,
is physically and
genetically a woman.
She wants to see if
testosterone can
turn her into a man.
I remembered having this
distinct moment where I
thought that God had made a
mistake and that I should have
been a boy.
Which I thought was interesting
because I grew up
in an atheist household.
I didn't really have a good
conception of what God was, or
that there was an entity that
could have made a mistake.
But I remembered having this
very clear moment.
Science can't explain why she
feels like this, but she knows
she's not right the
way she is.
She wants the body and
looks of a man.
The idea that I could do this,
that I could change something
about the way that
I was made up.
That it could change the way
that my body had been born was
very exciting to me.
To masculinize her body, Max is
planning to take a close of
testosterone.
I'm taking my life into my own
hands in a lot of ways,
because there aren't a lot of
studies about the long term
effects of testosterone.
But Max really wanted
to do it, and
have it properly evaluated.
So we followed her testosterone
treatment for six
months, to see what effect it
would have, not only on her
body, but also on her mind.
Three, two, one.
The body changes will
be the most obvious.
Testosterone should build her
muscles and make her more
powerful, which should mean
that she'll run faster.
To test this effect, we set up
a round course of just over a
mile in Panhandle Park, in the
middle of San Francisco, and
recorded her time.
11 minutes exactly.
We'll come back and check that
time as we monitor the
progress of her testosterone
treatment.
Apart from the rather obvious
physical effects, testosterone
might also change the
way her brain works.
So we had her brain scanned by
Dr. Rubin Gur, one of the
world's leading scientists
on the effects of
hormones on the brain.
Go.
Dr. Gur also put Max through
a battery of practical and
psychological tests, designed
to see just how feminine Max
currently is.
Stop.
Max shows a fairly typical
female profile, cognitively.
And I'd be curious to
see whether there
is a change in that.
At the moment, by any, measure
Max is a woman.
But that's about to change.
I had a birthday
party recently.
And I thought as part of the
festivities that I would allow
people to express themselves
artistically by drying my
future facial hair.
So I gave people this form and
this is some of the stuff they
came up with.
Trucker Max.
Flaming Max.
Spit curls.
Bad 80s rock star.
Funky shimmer boy.
My absolute favorite, the I'm
secure in my masculinity Max.
Today's the day when Max
receives her first shot of
testosterone.
Hey, Max, come on in.
From now on, she wants to
be referred to as he.
So this is the big day, huh?
I'm starting you on a
really small dose.
It's a very small volume,
so it's not a problem.
I actually still have to go draw
it up, I just wanted to
check what dose that we're
starting you on.
Max will soon be exposed to the
same level of testosterone
as a young boy going
through puberty.
Okee-doke.
Here we go.
There you go.
On three.
One, two, three.
There you go, that's it.
Yay.
Put an band-aid on there.
Thank you.
You're very welcome.
It was kind of exciting, and
it was kind of scary.
And my arm hurt.
Ow.
I'm rolling the dice and
seeing what it is
that's going to happen.
And I have my own personal
beliefs about how much one's
personality shifts aren't
biochemical.
I'm kind of in the camp of, I
think that a lot of stuff is
sociological, and I'm willing
to stake my life on it.
And the better part of
my biochemistry.
We're going to see, at
the end of this.
I don't want to wake up and
be knuckle-dragging and
chest-thumping and
things like that.
It does make me nervous, but
I don't think I will.
Women naturally have some
testosterone in their bodies.
But men have 10 times as much.
And some have more
than others.
But does it really matter
what your level is?
Take a look at these athletes.
They're all highly trained 100
meter specialists, and about
the same age.
But if they raced, could you
tell, just by looking
at them who'd win?
Well, this man, Dr. John Manning
says he can, just by
measuring their fingers.
And that's because testosterone
levels and finger
lengths are intimately linked.
We've known for a long time that
there's a sex difference
in the fingers.
That it's quite a subtle
difference and, in general,
people don't talk about and
don't know about it even.
It starts in the womb.
Hormones rush through the
developing embryo, building
and shaping the body, including
the fingers.
And the effects can be
seen years later.
Compare the hand of the man on
the left, with that of the
woman on the right.
The man's ring finger is longer
than his index finger.
In the case of the woman,
it's the opposite.
The index finger is longer
than the ring finger.
We think that the length of the
ring finger is a direct
indicator of the amount
of testosterone one's
exposed to in utero.
And the length of the index
finger indicates the amount of
estrogen you've been exposed
to in utero.
So it's the relative lengths
of these two
fingers that are important.
If you've got a longer ring
finger than your index finger,
you've been exposed to
high testosterone.
If you've got a longer index
finger than ring finger,
you've been exposed to low
testosterone and high estrogen.
Dr. Manning is one of the
world's leading experts on
testosterone.
In the course of his
investigations, he's worked
both with infertile
men, and with
professional football players.
He believes prenatal
testosterone plays a big part
in determining future athletic
performance.
OK, lads.
All I'm going to do is measure
your fingers on your left hand
and your right hand--
But he's never put his
considerable reputation on the
line by trying to predict the
result of a race between
athletes he's never
met, or seen run.
If I can have your right
hand first. This
is a high risk business.
It would be nice to have 10
races, with 10 different
groups of athletes.
And I think we would probably
be able to predict eight out
of the 10 winners of
those 10 races.
One race is highly chance-y,
but I'll give it a go.
So, why should it work?
Well, testosterone helps develop
the heart and lungs.
The engine of any athlete.
Crudely speaking, the bigger the
hit of testosterone in the
womb, the greater the physical
potential of the fetus.
It's obviously impossible to
say with any certainty how
much testosterone these men were
exposed to when in their
mother's wombs.
Instead, Dr. Manning is using
their fingers as a guide to
the size of their
in utero hit.
The runners and their coach
aren't entirely convinced.
Don't think it's
going to work.
Not confident at all about it.
We're all probably a bit
skeptical about it.
But it's got [? undue ?]
possibilities if there's
something in it.
I cannot see it.
Why your hand measurements
would predict
how fast you run.
Can't see any connection
between the two.
While the lads get ready to run,
Dr. Manning finds a quiet
corner to make his
calculations.
So has he found a winner?
These are fine, very,
very fine young men.
They are excellent athletes.
And they've all had quite high
testosterone levels before
birth, as one would expect.
But there are clear differences
between them.
As far as he's concerned, these
are the winning fingers.
They belong to Tim
[? Abeyu ?].
And you can see the difference
between his ring finger and
his index finger is
quite marked.
Compare his head to one
of the other runners.
This is Ian [? Deeth's ?]
hand, and the difference
is obvious.
Tim's got a still very low
ratio and, I think, has
tremendous potential.
I think he's a very,
very fast runner.
So I'd go for Tim.
As they prepare to race, none
of the athletes know Dr.
Manning's selection.
So, the moment of truth.
They line up from the left.
In lane one it's Lawrence
[? Aubry ?].
In lane two, it's Jonathan
[? Beaches ?], three is Ian
[? Deeth, ?] four James
Ellington, and in five, Dr.
Manning's selection,
Tim [? Abeyu. ?]
be
And Abeyu's got an absolute
fly out, he
storms out of the blocks.
C'mon, Tim.
Dr. Manning looks like he's
picked a winner here, but
[? Aubry ?]
in lane one is fighting back.
But the big man in lane five
is pouring it on and
[? Abeyu's ?] got too much
and [? Abeyu ?] wins.
So the prediction was spot on.
Which was a huge relief
for Dr. Manning.
I was very, very pleased to see
Tim go across that line
first. And in great
style as well.
Be interested to know if they
ever research on elite
athletes, at the very top of
their game, if the same
principle applies.
Dr. Manning is conducting
similar research with the
British Ski Federation, helping
to select potential
downhill champions.
Men are engineered in such a way
as to be able to compete
physically against other men.
So the more testosterone a fetus
has-- a male fetus has--
the more efficient his
cardiovascular system is going
to be after birth.
If you don't get exposure early,
and to high amounts of
testosterone, then it will
affect your physical
competitive abilities
later in life.
In the light of such findings,
parents might be tempted to
add a touch of testosterone to
their growing fetuses, in the
hope this will make them
more athletic.
But building super athletes by
manipulating testosterone
would be dangerous.
And, anyway, there's much more
sophisticated technology available.
You can definitely create super
athletes in the future,
and there's a much easier way to
do that than to muck around
with the embryo itself.
The better way to do this is
to create the cassette of
genes that you want
in the laboratory.
So even before you come near an
embryo, in your laboratory
you put together each of the
genes that you want to put
into your future child.
You put them together, you make
sure that they're working
properly, and you put them on
to a brand new chromosome.
And then you take this
chromosome, which has already
been vetted for perfection, you
take this chromosome and
put it into the embryo.
And that's a much more efficient
way of changing a
large number of genetic
characteristics at the same time.
If you think that sounds
like science
fiction, you'd be wrong.
Artificial chromosomes are
not just figments in the
imagination of scientists, they
have already been created
in the laboratory.
They have already been placed
into mouse embryos.
We already have mice born with
these extra chromosomes.
And if you can do it in mice,
you can do it in humans.
But doing it in humans would be
big and disturbing advance.
The differences, on a genetic
level, between us and our
early ancestors, like
Australopithecus, are tiny.
Less than 1%.
If it only took a few tiny
changes in our DNA to go from
Australopithecus to us, imagine
where implanting an
array of artificial chromosomes
might lead to.
But perhaps it will
never happen.
We've got to be aware that
it' not easy to do.
Even if you achieve it, you've
then got to say, can
I keep doing it?
We've been to the moon once, but
there's no hotels there.
So the ability to do it once is
not the same as being able
to do it on a wet Wednesday
in Doncaster.
And I have great concerns about
the complexity of these
techniques, and their
applicability.
Even for severe diseases.
But even if you got it to the
stage where you could make it
work, and you could cure some
rare diseases, or some serious
diseases, would you actually use
that very precious, very
expensive and challenging
technology to do something as
trivial as social modification
of a person to make them
bigger, smarter, or whatever.
Which island full of mad
scientists is actually going
to do that?
I don't think they exist. I
don't think that would allow
their precious reserves
and resources to be
used for that purpose.
But expensive and challenging
technology is being used all
the time for purposes its
makers did not intend.
Testosterone wasn't
synthesized to
turn women into men.
Yet it's being used for that.
It's six months since Max
first started taking
testosterone.
So, what are the changes?
Well, he sings in a synagogue.
And his voice is certainly
different.
My voice is starting
to get deeper.
It fluctuates where--
depending on where I
am with the dose--
it can go farther down
when I'm singing.
But my speaking voice can be
anywhere from exactly normal
to slightly lower than normal.
And he's also getting
much hairier.
I'm getting more body hair in
traditionally male patterns.
Hair is coming in on the
back of my calves.
Hair's coming in on the edge
of my hands in a way that
never happened before.
I'm starting to get darker
facial hair here, and a little
bit more here.
Some on the sides, but
it's really subtle.
My whole body is changing
slightly.
My weight's redistributing.
My hips are getting smaller.
And my shoulders are starting
to get more broad, and I am
starting to get more
shoulder muscles.
Which, I have been working out
a lot, so it's clearly not
from what I've been doing.
Five, four, three, two, one.
And those physical changes
are having an
impact on his running.
He's a full minute faster than
when he was a woman.
Exactly 10 minutes.
There's no doubt that
testosterone can change the
body, but what effect does
it have on the brain?
Anyone who spends time with
children is well aware that
boys and girls tend to behave
differently, and play
differently.
It's always been assumed that
these differences are largely
driven by cultural and social
pressures, but there's
mounting evidence that this
doesn't explain everything.
Scientists are only just
beginning to understand the
role biology plays in shaping
children's behavior.
There's no question, the
children themselves know from
a very early age what
separates the
boys from the girls.
We don't like running,
we like being gentle.
We can play rough
all the time.
Girls put make-up
and boys don't.
My daddy always drives.
Boys do naughty things and we
would do naughty things.
Play behavior fascinates
scientists like Melissa Hines.
She's one of the leading figures
in a unique long-term
British study following children
as they grow up.
The study is examining all
aspects of developmental
behavior, and has followed
14,000 mothers and their
children for the
last 10 years.
And it's uncovered intriguing
evidence about biological
influences.
The early indications are
that testosterone
influences play behavior.
Boys and girls play differently
because their
brains are sexed differently.
Just like the body, there are
parts of the brain-- not the
whole brain, but certain
parts of it--
that have receptors, or
receiving units, for hormones,
including testosterone.
And in other species, including
non-human primates,
like Rhesus monkeys, hormones
program development of these
brain regions.
If that's the case, what
would testosterone
due to a female brain?
Can the apparently cultural
phenomenon of tomboys be
explained by exposure to higher
than average levels of
testosterone in the womb?
There's some evidence that high
levels of testosterone in
the womb are one factor that
influences the development of
play behavior in human beings.
We know, for instance, that
girls exposed to higher than
normal levels of androgen--
male hormone, prenatally--
on the average show more male
typical toy choices, like to
play more often with
boys, and show male
typical activity patterns.
If that's true, it will be
fascinating to see what effect
testosterone has on Max Toth.
Hold on, you all right, Max?
Yep.
All right, we'll get you
out of there now.
Well, remember six months ago,
Max was tested and had his
brain scanned by
Dr. Rubin Gur.
Today Max has come back to be
retested, to see if there have
been any changes in the
way that he thinks.
He will repeat the test he did
in the brain scanner to see if
testosterone he's been taking
has produced any alterations
in the structure and function
of his brain.
Next test, it's called
finger tapping.
Ready?
He'll also repeats the
other tests he did,
when he was a woman.
Like finger tapping.
Men tend to have better motor
skills and can, on average, do
more finger taps per
minute than women.
Men are also stronger, and
better at manipulating objects
in three dimensions.
Women, however, tend to have
better verbal skills and
better visual memories.
These are standard scientific
tests, and will show if,
mentally, Max has become
more like a man
and less like a woman.
What I would expect to find
is improved performance on
functions, on tasks where
males do better.
And worsening performance on
tests where women do better.
They know they've never really
studied this before.
I'm interested to see if
there's any difference,
because, you know I've heard
about the androgenizing
effects of testosterone on the
brain, so I'm interested to
see, well, is anything
changing?
But I'm fairly dubious
that anything will.
The first test measures Max's
emotional response
to a series of faces.
The machine takes pictures of
Max's brain activity as he
looks at faces, which can then
be compared with his emotional
response when he performed
the same test as a woman.
The results are startling.
What we're seeing really is a
female brain turning into a
male brain.
It was quite amazing to see
it on a single individual.
This is a scan of Max's brain
when he was a woman.
The red area show which parts
of the brain are used when
trying to read emotions.
And this is a scan of Max's
brain doing the same
task, but as a man.
The more red in the scan
picture, the harder the brain
is working.
As you can see, he found it much
easier to read emotions
when he was a woman
than he does now.
Woman.
Man.
In his case, the second
time he had more
difficulties with the task.
He had to put in more effort
in order to perform that
particular task.
So his brain responds more like
a male brain to the task
of trying to distinguish
the emotions.
But how did Max do in
the practical tests?
All the changes are in the
direction that we expected, in
terms of becoming
more masculine.
Interesting.
So, remember the
finger tapping?
You managed to squeeze in
another three taps per minute.
Woo-hoo.
Max is also much stronger.
You pushed another four kilos.
So that's significant.
His spatial awareness has
dramatically improved.
Last time you did 75 correct,
this time you did 118 correct.
That's pretty much the
end of the good news.
Because with becoming a male,
you also lost a little bit.
Max's visual memory has
deteriorated, and he's not as
good with words.
I was actually surprised.
I was thinking maybe one or
two tests will change.
This is, after all, a fairly
brief period of time.
You would expect changes on
those tests to take place over
a longer period.
Max is still skeptical about
the extent to which
testosterone has changed his
brain, but acknowledges that
it has affected how he feels.
My body is changing.
And it has been surprising
to go through that.
It's been kind of exciting, and
there were changes that I
wasn't so--
that I didn't expect
to go through.
There was a period of
time where I had a
really hard time crying.
And it felt biological to me.
And by that, I mean I've gone
through different periods in
my life where I had a harder
time crying, and had an easier
time crying.
And this was the first time
where I felt like I really
wanted to cry, and there was
something biochemical
preventing me from doing it.
Like it really felt
like a big block.
And that was kind of a
scary moment for me.
For Max, there's now
no going back.
As you can see, this time lapse
sequence, he's already
undergone remarkable changes
in just six months.
In another year, he will
look like this.
Further down the line, Max might
consider having surgery
to enhance his masculinity.
But, for now, he's
happy with what
testosterone alone has done.
I'm very excited.
Like, I didn't think I would
be that excited about it.
But the way that my body is
changing shape, the way that
my fat's redistributing, that
my shoulders are getting
broader, the facial hair.
It's really exciting for me.
It's starting to feel much more
comfortable for me to be
in my body.
And even some of my friends
have noticed.
They're like, wow, you're
much more comfortable.
And I just present more
comfortable and more confident
because I feel better.
Manipulating sex hormones has
allowed Max Toth to make a
choice about his gender.
But science is only just
beginning to explore what can
be done to humans.
Manipulating DNA to build
super athletes, or even
radically redesigned humans,
may be a long way off.
But the future has
a way of arriving
faster than we imagine.
The question for society in the
21st century is no longer,
what can we do, but how far
are we prepared to go?
Next week, aging.
Thanks to recent advances in
molecular biology, it's now
possible to explain exactly
why we age.
Scientists have now identified
the rogue elements that cause
aging, and have developed drugs
that, for the first
time, truly extend life.